# Go Detection

## Requirements

Go detection depends on the following to successfully run:

- `go.mod` or `go.sum` files

## Default Detection strategy

Go detection depends on the following to successfully run:

- Go v1.11+.

Full dependency graph generation is supported if Go v1.11+ is present
on the build agent. If no Go v1.11+ is present, fallback detection
strategy is performed.

Go detection is performed by parsing output from executing [go list -m
-json all](1). To generate the graph, the command [go mod graph](2) is
executed, this only adds edges between the components that were
already registered by `go list`.

## Fallback Detection strategy

### `go.mod` before go 1.17

Go detection is performed by parsing any `go.mod` or `go.sum` found
under the scan directory.

Only root dependency information is generated instead of full graph.
I.e. tags the top level component or explicit dependency a given
transitive dependency was brought by. Given a dependency tree A -> B
-> C, C's root dependency is A.

### `go.mod` after 1.17

Go detection is performed by only scanning the `go.mod` files. This
reduces over reporting dependencies. The `go.mod` file contains all
dependencies, including transitive ones. [^3]

Similarly, no graph is generated.

**To force fallback detection strategy, create set environment
variable `DisableGoCliScan=true`.**

## Known limitations

- If the default strategy is used and go modules are not present in
the system before the detector is executed, the go cli will fetch all
modules to generate the dependency graph. This will incur additional
detector time execution.

- Dev dependency tagging is not supported.

- Go detection will fallback if no Go v1.11+ is present.

- (Prior to Go 1.17) Due to the nature of `go.sum` containing
references for all dependencies, including historical,
no-longer-needed dependencies; the fallback strategy can result in
over detection. Executing [go mod
tidy](https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-mod-tidy) before detection via the
fallback strategy is encouraged. 

- Some legacy dependencies may report stale transitive dependencies in
their manifests, in this case you can remove them safely from your
binaries by using [exclude
directive](https://go.dev/doc/modules/gomod-ref#exclude).

## Environment Variables

If the environment variable `DisableGoCliScan` is set to `true`, the
Go detector parses `go.mod` and `go.sum` to discover dependencies.
otherwise, it executes default strategy.

## Go Overview

### `go.mod` and `go.sum` Files

In the Go programming language, `go.mod` and `go.sum` files play a
vital role in managing dependencies and ensuring the reproducibility
and security of a Go project. These files are central to Go's module
system, introduced in Go version 1.11, which revolutionized how Go
manages external packages and dependencies.

### `go.mod` File

The `go.mod` file, short for "module file," is a fundamental component
of Go's module system.[^4] It serves several crucial purposes:

1. **Module Definition**: The `go.mod` file defines the module name,
   which uniquely identifies the project. The module name typically
   follows the format of a version control repository URL or a custom
   path, such as `example.com/myproject`.

2. **Dependency Declaration**: Inside the `go.mod` file, you declare
   the specific versions of dependencies your project relies on.
   Dependencies are listed with their module paths and version
   constraints.

   ```
   go module example.com/myproject

   go 1.17

   require (
        github.com/somepackage v1.2.3 golang.org/x/someotherpackage v0.4.0
   )

   ```

   Here, `github.com/somepackage` and `golang.org/x/someotherpackage`
   are declared as project dependencies with specific version
   constraints.

3. **Semantic Versioning**: Go uses Semantic Versioning (Semver) to
   specify version constraints for dependencies. You can specify
   constraints such as `v1.2.3` (exact version) or `>=1.2.0, <2.0.0`
   (range of versions).

4. **Dependency Resolution**: When you build your project or import
   new dependencies, Go uses the `go.mod` file to resolve and download
   the exact versions of dependencies that satisfy the specified
   constraints.

5. **Dependency Graph**: The `go.mod` file implicitly constructs a
   dependency graph of your project's dependencies, allowing Go to
   ensure that all dependencies are compatible and can be built together.

### `go.sum` File

The `go.sum` file, short for "checksum file," is used for ensuring the
integrity and security of dependencies. It contains checksums
(cryptographic hashes) of specific versions of packages listed in the
`go.mod` file.[^5] The `go.sum` file serves the following purposes:

1. **Cryptographic Verification**: When Go downloads a package
   specified in the `go.mod` file, it verifies the downloaded
   package's integrity by comparing its checksum with the checksum
   recorded in the `go.sum` file. If they don't match, it signals a
   potential security breach or data corruption.

2. **Dependency Pinning**: The `go.sum` file pins the exact versions
   of dependencies used in the project. It ensures that the same
   package versions are consistently used across different builds and
   development environments, which aids in reproducibility.

3. **Security**: By including checksums, the `go.sum` file helps
   protect against tampering with packages during transit or in case
   of compromised repositories. It adds a layer of trust in the packages
   being used.

Here's a simplified example of entries in a `go.sum` file:

```
github.com/somepackage v1.2.3 h1:jh2u3r9z0wokljwesdczryhtnu1xf6wl4h7h2us9rj0=
github.com/anotherpackage v0.4.0 h1:rn2iw0z7liy6d87dwygfawxqvx86jxd4m8hkw6yaj88=
```

Each line contains the package path, version, and a cryptographic hash
of the package contents.

#### Relevance in Dependency Scanning

1. **Dependency Resolution**: Dependency scanners use the information
   in `go.mod` to understand which packages and versions a Go project
   depends on.

2. **Security and Trust**: The `go.sum` file ensures that dependencies
   are downloaded securely and have not been tampered with during
   transit.

3. **Build Reproducibility**: `go.mod` and `go.sum` files contribute
   to build reproducibility by pinning exact versions of dependencies,
   making it possible to recreate the same build environment
   consistently.

### Detection Strategy

The Go Component Detector follows a strategy that involves the
following key steps:

1. **File Discovery**: The detector searches for go.mod and go.sum files
   within the project directory.

2. **Filtering go.sum Files**: The detector filters out go.sum files when
   there is no adjacent go.mod file or when the go.mod file specifies
   a Go version lower than 1.17. This filtering reduces the risk of
   over-reporting components. More on this later.

3. **Go CLI Scanning (Optional)**: If the Go CLI (go) is available and not
   manually disabled, the detector attempts to use it to scan the
   project for dependencies and build a dependency graph. This step can
   significantly improve detection speed.

4. **Fallback Detection**: If Go CLI scanning is not possible or not
   successful, the detector falls back to parsing go.mod and go.sum
   files directly to identify components.

5. **Parsing go.mod File**: The detector parses the go.mod file to
   identify direct and transitive dependencies, recording their names
   and versions.

6. **Parsing go.sum File**: The detector parses the go.sum file, recording
   information about dependencies, including their names, versions,
   and hashes.

7. **Dependency Graph Construction**: If Go CLI scanning was successful,
   the detector constructs a dependency graph based on the information
   gathered. This graph helps identify relationships between components.

8. **Recording Components**: Throughout the detection process, the
   detector records identified components and their relationships.

9. **Environment Variable Check**: The detector checks for an environment
   variable (DisableGoCliScan) to determine whether Go CLI scanning
   should be disabled.

The logic for checking if the Go version present in the `go.mod` file
is greater than or equal to 1.17 is relevant because it determines
whether the `go.sum` file should be processed for detection.

This check is essential because Go introduced significant changes in
how it handles dependencies and the `go.sum` file in Go version 1.17,
which have implications for dependency scanning.

### Go Module Changes in Go 1.17

Prior to Go 1.17, the `go.mod` file primarily contained information
about direct dependencies, but it didn't include information about
transitive (indirect) dependencies. This made it challenging to
accurately detect and manage all dependencies in a project.

In Go 1.17 and later, Go introduced an important change: the `go.mod`
file now includes information about both direct and transitive
dependencies. This improvement enhances the clarity and completeness
of dependency information within the `go.mod` file.

#### Relevance of the Go Version Check

1. **Accuracy of Dependency Detection**: Checking the Go version in
   the `go.mod` file allows the Go Component Detector to determine
   whether the project is using the enhanced module system introduced in
   Go 1.17. If the Go version is 1.17 or higher, it indicates that the
   `go.mod` file contains information about transitive dependencies.
   Processing this updated `go.mod` file provides a more accurate and
   comprehensive view of the project's dependencies.

2. **Avoiding Over-Reporting**: In projects using Go 1.17 and later,
   transitive dependencies are already listed in the `go.mod` file,
   and processing the corresponding `go.sum` file could lead to
   over-reporting components. By not processing the `go.sum` file when
   it's not necessary (i.e., when the `go.mod` file includes transitive
   dependencies), the detector avoids redundant or incorrect component
   detection.

3. **Minimizing Noise**: Over-reporting components can result in
   unnecessary noise in the scan results.

## Detection Validation Strategy

The changes in the Go detector were validated by:

1. **Unit tests**: Sample `go.mod` and `go.sum` files were created
   and placed as unit tests. Other unit tests for go version less than
   1.17 were still maintained to ensure there were no regressions.

2. **Local testing**: Real `go.mod` and `go.sum` from the go CLI
   were created from a real test codebase and verified manually.

The main change for the go detector was not in the parsing of the
go.mod files, but rather simply filtering `go.sum` files if an
adjacent `go.mod` file specified a version higher than 1.17.

[1]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-list-m 
[2]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-mod-graph
[3]: https://go.dev/doc/modules/gomod-ref#go-notes
[4]: https://go.dev/doc/modules/gomod-ref
[5]: https://go.dev/ref/mod#go-sum-files
